AzAutoGen build docs (#2005)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/build/generated-source.md

<!-- TODO: Verify - can explicit filenames be absolute or relative to the CMakeLists.txt file?-->

The input filename supports the following matching operators:
  * `*` - Sequence of characters any length.
  * `?` - Single-character sequence.
  * `[<sequence>]` - Matches any characters in `<sequence>`.
  * `[!<sequence>]` - Matches any characters _not_ in `<sequence>`.

For information about authoring data input files, refer to [Authoring Jinja templates and data inputs](/docs/user-guide/programming/autogen/).

### Jinja Templates

A template filename must be an explicit path to a single `.jinja` file. The path can be absolute or relative to the `CMakeLists.txt` file. 

For information about authoring Jinja templates, refer to [Authoring Jinja templates and data inputs](/docs/user-guide/programming/autogen/).

### Output files

When AzAutoGen feeds data input files into the Jinja2 templates, it generates output files. You must specify the names of the output files you want to generate in the autogen rules. You can use the following *special values* when defining the output filenames:

> * `$path`: The path to the final output destination.

Reviewer: We can reiterate that the `$path` corresponds to the `${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/Azcg/Generated` directory from line 25 of this doc.

* `$fileprefix`: The name of the current file up to the first `.` token. This is equivalent to running the UNIX shell command `basename ${file%%.*}`.

> * `$file`: The full name of the input file. This is equivalent to running the UNIX shell command `basename $file`.

Reviewer: For `$fileprefix`, we state that it is the name of the "current file", but for `$file` we state it is the full name of the "input file".
For consistency we should probably use "current input file" for both.

{{< important >}}
When generating multiple output files, the output name should _always_ begin with `$path`. Otherwise, AzAutoGen may place output files in an incorrect directory.
{{< /important >}}

### Example

The following example shows how autogen rules are formatted.

```
AUTOGEN_RULES
    # Test wildcarded expansion for xml
    *.AutoEnum.xml,AutoEnum_Header.jinja,$path/$fileprefix.AutoEnum.h
    *.AutoEnum.xml,AutoEnum_Source.jinja,$path/$fileprefix.AutoEnum.cpp
    
    # Test wildcarded expansion for json
    *.AutoStruct.json,AutoStruct_Header.jinja,$path/$fileprefix.AutoStruct.h
    
    # Test explicit data input file
    AzCore/AutoGen/WeaponTypes.AutoStruct.json,AutoStruct_Header.jinja,$path/$fileprefix2.AutoStruct.h
    
    # Test globbing data input files into a single output file
    *.AutoEnum.xml,AutoEnumRegistry_Header.jinja,$path/AutoEnumRegistry.h
```

## Integrating with any target

> Most of the time, you want to run AzAutoGen by passing autogen rules into `ly_add_target()`, as outlined in the [Integrating with an O3DE build target](#integrating-with-an-o3de-build-target) section earlier. 

Reviewer: The `#integrating-with-an-o3de-build-target` reference doesn't appear to be jumping to that section in the deployment preview.

---
linktitle: Build Generated Source Files
title: Build Generated Source Files with AzAutoGen
description: Learn how to integrate AzAutoGen into Open 3D Engine (O3DE), so it can generate source files when building a target using CMake.
---

For complicated systems that use a lot of boilerplate code, it's useful to perform some kind of light automation to generate source files where possible. To generate files during builds, **Open 3D Engine (O3DE)** uses the **AzAutoGen** tool through a CMake command. O3DE stores the output source code in your CMake build directory and picks up the code to build it in your target.

> In order to use AzAutoGen, you must provide Jinja templates and XML or JSON data files that AzAutoGen can generate output files from. The contents of these files depend on your intended purpose for using AzAutoGen. For a complete description of how AzAutoGen works and how to write templates and data inputs for generation, read [Automate Source Generation from Templates with AzAutoGen](/docs/user-guide/programming/autogen/). 

Author: Combination of both suggestions

```suggestion
To use AzAutoGen, you must provide Jinja templates and XML or JSON data files that AzAutoGen can generate output files from. The contents of these files depend on your intended purpose for using AzAutoGen. For a complete description of how AzAutoGen works and how to write templates and data inputs for generation, refer to [Automate Source Generation from Templates with AzAutoGen](/docs/user-guide/programming/autogen/). 
```

## Integrating with an O3DE target build

> AzAutoGen invokes when CMake builds an O3DE target. To invoke AzAutoGen and generate the output source files for your project or Gem, complete the following steps:

Reviewer 2: Finding the wording here a bit odd. A suggestion

```suggestion
AzAutoGen is invoked when CMake builds an O3DE target. To invoke AzAutoGen and generate the output source files for your project or Gem, complete the following steps:
```

```cmake
ly_add_target(
    NAME AzNetworking STATIC
    NAMESPACE AZ
    FILES_CMAKE
        AzNetworking/aznetworking_files.cmake
    # ...
    AUTOGEN_RULES
        *.AutoPackets.xml,AutoPackets_Header.jinja,$path/$fileprefix.AutoPackets.h
        *.AutoPackets.xml,AutoPackets_Inline.jinja,$path/$fileprefix.AutoPackets.inl
        *.AutoPackets.xml,AutoPackets_Source.jinja,$path/$fileprefix.AutoPackets.cpp
)
```

Data input files and templates are included in [Code\Framework\AzNetworking\AzNetworking\aznetworking_files.cmake](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/dd0978c59f1d01b39e006e6c3ba3baf6060136cf/Code/Framework/AzNetworking/AzNetworking/aznetworking_files.cmake#L12-L17). 
```cmake
set(FILES
    # ...
    AutoGen/AutoPacketDispatcher_Header.jinja
    AutoGen/AutoPacketDispatcher_Inline.jinja
    AutoGen/AutoPackets_Header.jinja
    AutoGen/AutoPackets_Inline.jinja
    AutoGen/AutoPackets_Source.jinja
    AutoGen/CorePackets.AutoPackets.xml
    # ...
)
```

## Autogen rules

> An *autogen rule* instructs CMake to generate files by using AzAutoGen. 

Reviewer 2: minor suggestion

```suggestion
An *autogen rule* instructs CMake to use AzAutoGen to generate files. 
```

{{< /important >}}

### Example

The following example shows how autogen rules are formatted.

```
AUTOGEN_RULES
    # Test wildcarded expansion for xml
    *.AutoEnum.xml,AutoEnum_Header.jinja,$path/$fileprefix.AutoEnum.h
    *.AutoEnum.xml,AutoEnum_Source.jinja,$path/$fileprefix.AutoEnum.cpp
    
    # Test wildcarded expansion for json
    *.AutoStruct.json,AutoStruct_Header.jinja,$path/$fileprefix.AutoStruct.h
    
    # Test explicit data input file
    AzCore/AutoGen/WeaponTypes.AutoStruct.json,AutoStruct_Header.jinja,$path/$fileprefix2.AutoStruct.h
    
    # Test globbing data input files into a single output file
    *.AutoEnum.xml,AutoEnumRegistry_Header.jinja,$path/AutoEnumRegistry.h
```

## Integrating with any target

Most of the time, you want to run AzAutoGen by passing autogen rules into `ly_add_target()`, as outlined in the [Integrating with an O3DE build target](#integrating-with-an-o3de-build-target) section earlier. 
However, in uncommon cases, you may want to run AzAutoGen when building a target that isn't defined by `ly_add_target()`. 

> To do this you can add an autogen step to any build target by calling the `ly_add_autogen()` CMake command. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do this, you can add an autogen step to any build target by calling the `ly_add_autogen()` CMake command. 
```

> This associates a target with a set of autogen rules and gives an explicit list of the generated output files to include in the target build.

Reviewer 3: At target definition is probably cleaner and easier to maintain longer term.
